____________________________________________________________

Tarltons iests Drawne into these three parts. 1 His court-wittie iests 2 His sound cittie iests. 3 His country prettie iests. Full of delight, wit, and honest myrth.

Author: Anonymous

Publication info: [32+] leaves. London: Printed [by Thomas Snodham] for Iohn Budge, and are to be sold at his shop, at the great South doore of Paules, 1613.

https://www.proquest.com/books/tarltons-iests-drawne-into-these-three-parts-1/docview/2248567929/se-2?accountid=9784

Abstract: None available.

Links: https://bucknell.on.worldcat.org/v2/search?queryString=ti%3A%28Tarltons+iests+Drawne+into+these+three+parts.+1+His+court-wittie+iests+2+His+sound+cittie+iests.+3+His+country+prettie+iests.+Full+of+delight%2C+wit%2C+and+honest+myrth.%29&amp;databaseList=638&amp;origPageViewName=pages%2Fadvanced-search-page&amp;clusterResults=true&amp;scope=

https://bucknell.on.worldcat.org/atoztitles/link?issn=&amp;jtitle=&amp;volume=&amp;aulast=Anonymous&amp;spage=&amp;atitle=&amp;date=1613&amp;issue=

https://bucknell.on.worldcat.org/atoztitles/link?rft.au=Anonymous&amp;rft.atitle=&amp;rft.jtitle=&amp;rft.date=1613&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.issn=?sid=ProQ:&amp;issn=&amp;volume=&amp;issue=&amp;title=Tarltons+iests+Drawne+into+these+three+parts.+1+His+court-wittie+iests+2+His+sound+cittie+iests.+3+His+country+prettie+iests.+Full+of+delight%2C+wit%2C+and+honest+myrth.&amp;spage=&amp;date=1613-01-01&amp;atitle=Tarltons+iests+Drawne+into+these+three+parts.+1+His+court-wittie+iests+2+His+sound+cittie+iests.+3+His+country+prettie+iests.+Full+of+delight%2C+wit%2C+and+honest+myrth.&amp;au=Anonymous&amp;id=doi:

https://bucknell.on.worldcat.org/atoztitles/link?rft.au=Anonymous&amp;rft.atitle=&amp;rft.jtitle=&amp;rft.date=1613&amp;rft.volume=&amp;rft.issue=&amp;rft.spage=&amp;rft.issn=?sid=ProQ:&amp;issn=&amp;volume=&amp;issue=&amp;title=Tarltons+iests+Drawne+into+these+three+parts.+1+His+court-wittie+iests+2+His+sound+cittie+iests.+3+His+country+prettie+iests.+Full+of+delight%2C+wit%2C+and+honest+myrth.&amp;spage=&amp;date=1613-01-01&amp;atitle=Tarltons+iests+Drawne+into+these+three+parts.+1+His+court-wittie+iests+2+His+sound+cittie+iests.+3+His+country+prettie+iests.+Full+of+delight%2C+wit%2C+and+honest+myrth.&amp;au=Anonymous&amp;id=doi:

Full text: Tarltons Iests.

Drawne into these three parts.

1 His Court-wittie Iests
2 His sound Cittie Iests.
3 His Country prettie Iests.

Full of Delight, Wit, and honest Myrth.

[Figure: ]

LONDON, Printed for Iohn Budge, and are to be sold at his shop, at the great South doore of Paules. 1613.


Unnumbered page


Tarltons Court wittie Iests
Tarlton plaid the Drunkard before the Queene. T HE Quéene being discontented: which Tarlton perceiuing, tooke vpon him to delight her with some quaint Iest, whereupon he counterfaited a Drunkard, and calling for Béere, which was brought immediately: Her Maiestie noting his humor, commanded that he should haue no more, for quoth she, he will play the beast, and so shame himselfe. Feare not you quoth Tarlton, for your Béere is small enough. Whereat her Maiestie laughed heartily, and commanded that hee should haue enough.


How Tarlton deceiued the Watch in Fleetstreet. TArlton hauing beene late at the Court, and comming homewards through Fléetstréet, hée espyed the watch, not knowing how to passe them, went very fast, thinking by that meanes to goe vnexamined: but the Watch-men perceiuing that he shunned them, stept to him, and commanded him (in the Quéens name) to stand. Stand, quoth Tarlton, let them stand that can, for I cannot: so falling downe as though he had béene drunke, they helpt him vp, and so let him passe.


How Tarlton flouted a Lady in the Court. VPon a time, Tarlton being among certaine Ladies at a banquet which was at Gréenwitch, the Quéene then lying there, one of the Ladies had her face full of pimples with heate at her stomacke, for which cause she refused to drinke wine amongst the rest of the Ladies, which Tarlton perceiuing (for he was there of purpose to iest amongst thē) quoth hee, a murren of that face which makes all the body fare the worse for it. At which the rest of the Ladies laught, and she blushing for shame left the banquet.


Tarltons opinion of Oysters. CErtaine Noblemen and Ladies of the Court, being eating of Oysters, one of them séeing Tarlton, called him, and asked if he loued Oysters: No quoth Tarlton, for they be vngodly meat, vncharitable meat, & vnprofitable meate: why? quoth the Courtiers: they are vngodly, because they are eaten without Grace: vncharitable, because they leaue nought but shels: and vnprofitable, because they must swim in wine.


Tarltons resolution of a question. ONe of the company taking the Gentlemans part, asked Tarlton at what time he thought the Deuill to be most busied? When the Pope dyes quoth he: why? sayes the Courtier: Marry (answered he) then all the Diuels are troubled and busied to plague him, for he hath sent many a soules before him thither, that exclaime against him.


How a Parsonage fell into Tarltons hands. HEr Maiesty dining in the Strand at the Lord Treasurers, the Lords were very desirous that she would
Unnumbered page

vouchsafe to stay all night, but nothing could preuaile with her: Tarlton was in his Clownes apparell, being all dinner while in the presence with her, to make her merry, and hearing the sorrow that the Noblemen made that they could not worke her stay, he asked the Nobles what they would giue him to worke her stay: the Lords promised him any thing, to performe it: quoth hee, procure me the Parsonage of Shard. They caused the Patent to be drawne presently, he got on a Parsons gowne, and a corner cap, and standing vpon the staires where the Quéene should descend, he repeated these words: a Parson or no Parson? a Parson or no Parson? but after she knew his meaning, she not onely stayed all night, but the next day willed he should haue possession of the benefice: a madder Parson was neuer, for hee threatned to turne the Bel-mettel into lyning for his purse, which hee did, the Parsonage and all, into ready money.


How Tarlton proued two Gentlewomen dishonest by their owne words. TArlton séeing in Gréenwitch two Gentlewomen in the Garden together, to moue myrth, comes to them, and enquires thus: Gentlewomen, which of you two is the honester? I, saies the one, I hope without exceptions: and I quoth the other, since we must speake for our selues: so then saies Tarlton, one of you by your owne words is dishonest, one being honester then the other, else you would answere otherwise: but as I found you, so I leaue you.


How Tarlton answered a wanton Gentlewoman. A Gentlewoman merily disposed, being crost by Tarlton, & halfe angry, said, sirra▪ a little thing would make me requite you with a cuffe: with a cuffe Lady, sayes Tarlton, so would you spel my sorrow forward, but spell my sorrow backward, then cuffe me and spare not: when the Gentlemen by, considered of the Word, their laughing made the simple-meaning Gentlewoman to blush for shame.


How Tarlton dared a Lady. AT the dinner in the great Chamber where Tarlton iested, the Ladies were daring one another: quoth one I euer durst any thing that is honest and honourable: a French crowne of that, sayes Tarlton: ten pound of that sayes the Lady: done sayes one, done sayes another. Tarlton put a two-pence betwixt his lips, and dared her to take it away with her lips. Fye saies she, that is immodestie. What, tokisse saies Tarlton? then immodesty beares a great hand ouer all: but once in your life say, you haue béene beaten at your owne weapon. Well sir, saies she, you may say any thing. Then sayes Tarlton, remember I say you dare not, and so my wager is good.


How Tarlton landed at Cuckolds hauen. TArlton being one Sunday at Court all day, caused a payre of Oares to tend him, who at night called on him to be gone: Tarlton being a carousing, drunke so long to the Watermen, that one of them was bumpsie, and so indéed were all thrée for the most part: at last they left Gréenwitch, the Tide being at a great low fall, the Watermen yet affraid of the crosse Cables by the Lime-house: very darke and late as it was, landed Tarlton at Cuckolds-hauen, and said the next day they would giue him a reason for it: But Tarlton was faine to goe by land to Reddriffe on the durty banke, euery step knée déepe: so that comming home, hee called one of his boyes to helpe him off with his boots, meaning his stockings, which were dyed of another colour. Whereupon one gaue him this Theame next day.

Tarlton tell me, for faine would I know,
If thou wert landed at Culckolds-hauen or no?



Unnumbered page

Tarlton answered thus:

Yes Sir, and I tak't in no scorne,
For many land there, yet misse of the horne.



How Tarlton fought with Blacke Dauie, NOt long since liued a little swaggerer, called blacke Dauie, who would at Sword and Buckler fight with any gentleman or other, for 12. pence: he being hired to draw vpon Tarlton, for breaking a iest vpon huffin Kate, a puncke as men tearmed her: one euening Tarlton comming forth at the Court-gate, being at Whitehal, and walking toward the Tilt-yard, this Dauie immediatly drew vpon Tarlton: who on the sudden, though amazed, drew likewise, and inquired the cause, which Dauie denied, till they had fought about or two: Tarlton couragiously got within him, and taking him in his armes, threw him into the Tilt-yard, who falling vpon his nose, broke it extreamely, that euer after he snuffled in the head; poore Dauie lying all that night in the Tilt-yard, expecting the doores to be opened, came forth, and at the Barber▪ surgeons told of this bloody combat, and the occasion of it was (quoth hee) because Tarlton being in a Tauerne in the companie of this damnable Cockatrice huffing Kate, called for wine: but she told him that without he would burne it, she would not drinke. No quoth Tarlton, it shal be burnt, for thou canst burn it without fire: as how sir? (quoth she) marry thus, take the Cup in thine hand & I will tell thée: So he filling the cup in her hand, said it was burnt sufficiently in so fiery a place: she perceiuing her selfe so flouted, hyred me to be her Champion to reuenge her quarrell.


How Tarlton answered the Watchmen comming from the Court. TArlton hauing plaied before the Quéen, till one a clock at midnight, comming homewards, one of them espied him, calling him, sirra, what art thou? a woman, sayes Tarlton: nay that is lie, saith the Watchmen, women haue no such beards: Tarlton replied, if I should haue said a man, that you know to be true, and would haue bidden mee tell you that you know not, therefore I sayd a Woman, and so I am all woman, hauing pleased the Quéene, being a Woman: Well sirra sayes another, I present the Quéene: then am I a woman indéed saies Tarlton as well as you, for you haue a beard as well as I, and truly Mistris Annis, my buske is not done yet, when will yours? leaue thy gybing fellow, saith the Watch; the Quéens will is that whosoeuer is taken without doores after ten a clocke, shall be committed, and now it is past one: commit all such sayes Tarlton, for if it be past one a clocke, it will not be ten this eight houres: with that one lifts vp his Lanthorne, and looks him in the face, and knew him: indéed M. Tarlton you haue more wit then all we, for it is true that ten was before one, but now one is before ten, it is true quoth Tarlton, Watchmen had wont to haue more wit, but for want of sléepe they are turned fooles: so Tarlton stole from them, and they to séeme wise went home to bed.


Tarltons answere to a Courtier. TArlton being at the Court all night, in the morning he met a great Courtier comming from his Chamber, who espying Tarlton, said: Good morrow Master Didimus and Tridimus: Tarlton being somewhat abashed, not knowing the meaning thereof, sayd: Sir, I vnderstand you not, expound I pray you: quoth the Courtier Didimus and Tridimus, is a foole and a knaue: you ouer-load me replyed Tarlton, for my backe cannot beare both, therefore take you the one, and I will take the other: take you the knaue, and I will carry the foole with me.


Unnumbered page


Tarltons quipe for a yong Courtier. THere was a yong Gentleman in the Court, that had first lyen with the Mother, and after with the Daughter, and hauing so done, asked Tarlton what it resembled: quoth he, as if you should first haue eaten the Hen, and after the Chicken.


Tarltons answere to a Noblemans question. THere was a Nobleman that asked Tarlton what he thought of Souldiers in time of peace? Marry quoth he, they are like Chimneyes in Summer.


Tarltons Iest to an vnthriftie Courtier. THere was an vnthriftie Gallant belonging to the Court that had borrowed fiue pounds of Tarlton, but hauing lost it at Dice, hee sent his man to Tarlton to borrow fiue pounds more, by the same token he owed him already fiue pounds: pray tell your Master, quoth Tarlton, that if he will send me the token, I will send him the money: for who deceiues me once, God forgiue him: If twice, God forgiue him: but if thrice, God forgiue him, but not me, because I could not beware.


How Tarlton flouted two Gallants. TArlton being in a mery vaine, as he walked in the great Hall in Gréenwitch, he met my old Lord Chamberlain, going betwéene two fantasticke gallants, & cryed aloud vnto him, my Lord, my Lord, you goe in great danger: whereat amazed, hee askt whereof: of drowning (quoth Tarlton ) were it not for those two bladders vnder ech of your armes.


Tarltons sound Cittie Iests.
Tarltons Iest of a red face. T O an Ordinary in the White Friers, where Gentlemen vsed, by reason of extraordinarie dyet, to this Tarlton often frequented, as well to continue acquaintance, as to please his appetite: it chanced so vpon a time (especially) being set amongst the Gentlemen and Gallants, they enquired of him why melancholy had got the vpper-hand of his mirth, to which he said little, but with a squint eie, as custom had made him hare▪ eied, he lookt for a Iest to make them merry; at last he espyed one that sate on his left side, which had a very red face, hee being a very great Gentleman (which was all one to Tarlton ) he presently in great hast called his Hoast: who do I serue my Hoast? quoth Tarlton, the Quéenes Maiestie, replied the good man of the house: how happens it then quoth Tarlton, that to her Maiesties disgrace, you dare make me a companion with Seruingmen, clapping my Lord Shandoyes Cullisance vpon my sléeue, looking at the Gentleman with the red face, me thinks quoth he, it sits like the Sarazens head without Newgate: the Gentlemans Salamanders face burnt▪ like Aetna for anger, the rest laughed heartily: in the end all inraged, the Gentleman swore to fight with him at the next méeting.


A sodaine and dangerous fray, twixt a Gentleman and Tarlton, which he put off with a Iest. AS Tarlton & others passed along Fléestréet, hee espied a spruce yong gallant, blacke of complexion, with long haire hanging downe ouer his eares, and his beard of the
Unnumbered page

Italian cut, in white Satten, very quaintly cut, and his body so stiffe starcht, that he could not bend himselfe any way for no gold: Tarlton, séeing such a wonder comming, trips before him, and méeting this gallant tooke the wall of him, knowing that one so proud, at least looked for the prerogatiue. The gallant scorning that a Player should take the wall, or so much indignifie him, turnes himselfe, and presently drew his Rapier, Tarlton drew likewise: The Gentleman fell to it roundly, but Tarlton in his owne defence, compassing and trauersing his ground, gaped with a wide mouth, whereat the people laughed: the Gentleman pausing, enquired why he gaped so? O Sir saies he, in hope to swallow you, for by my troth, you séeme to me like a prune in a Mesle of white Broth: at this the people parted them, the Gentleman noting his mad humour, went his way well contented, for he knew not how to amend it.


Tarltons Iest of a Pippin. AT the Bull in Bishopsgate stréet, where the Quéenes Plaiers oftentimes played: Tarlton comming on the Stage, one from the Gallerie threw a Pippin at him, Tarlton tooke vp the Pip, & looking on it made this sodaine iest.

Pip in or nose in, chuse you whether,
Put yours in, ere I put in the other:
Pippin you haue put in, then for my grace,
Would I might put your nose in another place.



A Iest of an Apple hitting Tarlton on the face. TArlton hauing flouted the fellow for his Pippin which he threw, he thought to be méet with Tarlton at length, so in the Play Tarltons part was to trauell, who knéeling downe to aske his Father blessing: the fellow threwe an Apple at him, which hit him on the chéeke: Tarlton taking vp the Apple made this Iest.

Gentlemen, this fellow with his face of Mapple.
In stead of a Pippin hath throwne me an Apple:
But as for an Apple he hath cast a Crab,
So in stead of an honest woman God hath sent him a Drab.


The people laughed heartily, for he had a Queane to his Wife.


How Tarlton and one in the Gallerie fell out. IT chanced that in the midst of a Play, after long expectation for Tarlton, (being much desired of the people) at length he came forth: where at his entrance, one in the gallerie pointed his finger at him, saying to a friend that had neuer séene him, that is he: Tarlton to make sport at the least occasion giuen him, and séeing the man point with one finger, he in loue againe held vp two fingers: the captious fellow iealous of his wife (for he was maried) and because a Player did it, tooke the matter more hainously, and askt him why hee made Hornes at him: No quoth Tarlton, they be fingers:

For there is no man which in loue to mee
Lends me one finger, but he shall haue three.


No, no, sayes the fellow, you gaue me the hornes: true saies Tarlton, for my fingers are tipt with nailes which are like hornes, and I must make a shew of that which you are sure of: this matter grew so, that the more he medled, the more it was for his disgrace: wherefore the standers by counselled him to depart, both he and his hornes, lest his cause grew desperate: so the poore fellow plucking his Hat ouer his eyes, went his wayes.


How Fiddlers fidled away Tarltons apparell. IT chanced that one Fancie and Nancie, a Musition in London, vsed often with their Boyes to visite Tarlton, when he dwelt in Gracious-stréet, at the signe of the Saba,
Unnumbered page

a Tauern▪ he being one of their best friends or benefactors, by reason of old acquaintance: to requite which, they came one summers morning to play him the Hunts' vp with such Musicke as they had: Tarlton, to requite them would open his Chamber doore, and for their paines would giue them Muskadine: which a Cony-catcher noting, and séeing Tarlton come foorth in his shirt and night-gowne to drinke with these Musitions, the while this nimble fellow stept in, and tooke Tarltons apparell which euery day he wore, thinking that if he were espied to turne it to a iest, but it past for currant and he goes his waies: Not long after Tarlton returned to his Chamber, and looked for his clothes, but they were safe enough from him. The next day this was noysed abroad, and one in the mockage threw him this Theam, he playing then at the Curtaine.

Tarlton I will tell thee a iest,
Which after turned to earnest:
One there was as I heard say,
Who in his shirt heard Musicke play,
While all his clothes were stolne away.


Tarlton smiling at this, answered on the sudden thus:

That's certaine, Sir, it is no lye,
That same one in truth was I:
When that the theefe shall pine and lacke,
Then shall I haue cloathes to my backe:
And I together with my fellowes,
May see him ride to Tiburne Gallowes.



Of Tarlton and a Begger. THere was a poore Begger (but a conceited fellow) who séeing Tarlton at his doore, askt somthing of him for gods cause. Tarlton putting his hand in his pocket, gaue him two pence in stead of a peny, at which Tarlton made this Rime:

Of all other Beggers most happy thou art,
For to thee my hand is better then my heart.


Quoth the Begger.

True it is Master, as it chanceth now,
The better for me, and the worse for you.



How Tarlton deceiued a Doctor of Phisicke. TArlton to satisfie the humors of certaine Gentlemen, his familiar acquaintance, went about for to try the skill of a simple Doctor of Phisicke, that dwelt not farre from I slington, and thus it was: hee tooke a faire Vrinall, and filled it halfe full of good wine, and bore it to this doctor, saying, it was a sicke mans water: who viewed it and tossing it vp and downe, as though he had great knowledge: quoth he, the patient whose water it is, is full of grosse humors, and hath néed of purging, and to be let some ten ounces of bloud. No you Dunce replyed Tarlton, it is good pisse, and with that drunke it off, and threw the Vrinall at his head.


How Tarlton frighted a Country fellow. TArlton passing through London, by chance hee heard a simple Country fellow in an Ale-house, calling for a Kingstone pot of Ale, stept into him and threatned to accuse him of treason, saying: Sirra, I haue séene and tasted of a penny pot of Ale, and haue found good of the price, but of a Kingstone coine I neuer heard, therefore it is some counterfait, and I must know how thou camest by it: hereupon the Countrey fellow was driuen into such a maze, that out of doores he got, and tooke him to his héeles, as though wildfire had followed him.


Unnumbered page


How Tarlton was deceiued by his wife in London. TArlton being merrily disposed, as his wife and he sate together, he said vnto her, Kate answere me to one question without a lye, and take this crowne of gold: which she tooke on condition, that if she lost, to restore it backe againe. Quoth Tarlton, am I a Cuckold or no Kate? Whereat she answered not a word, but stood silent: notwithstanding he vrged her many waies: Tarlton séeing she would not speak, askt his gold againe: why quoth she, haue I made any lye? no sayes Tarlton: why then goodman foole I haue won the wager: Tarlton mad with anger, made this Rime:

As women in speech can reuile a man,
So can they in silence beguile a man.



One askt Tarlton what Countrey man the Diuell was. IN Carter-lane dwelt a mery Cobler, who being in company with Tarlton, askt him what Countrey man the diuell was: quoth Tarlton, a Spaniard; for Spaniards like the Diuell, trouble the whole world.


A Cheese-mongers question to Tarlton. IN the time of Scarsitie, a simple Chéesemonger hearing Tarlton commended for his quick wit, came vnto him, and asked him why he thought Chéese and Butter to be so déere: Tarlton answered, because Wood and Coles are so déere, for Butter and Chéese a man may eate without a fire.


Tarltons answere to a rich Londiner. TArlton méeting a rich Londiner, fell into talke about the Bishop of Peterborough, highly praising▪ his bounty to his seruants, his liberalitie to strangers, his great Hospitalitie and Charitie to the poore. He doth well sayes the rich man, for what he hath is his but during his life. Why quoth Tarlton, for how many liues haue you your goods?


How Tarlton gaue away his dinner. AS Tarlton and his wife sate at dinner, his wife being displeased with him, and thinking to crosse him, shee gaue away halfe of his meat vnto a poore Beggar, saying, take this for my other husbands sake. Whereupon Tarlton tooke all that was left, and likewise bad the poore fellow to pray for his other wifes soule.


Tarltons answere to a Boy in Rime. THere was a crackrope Boy, méeting Tarlton in London stréet, sung this rime vnto Tarlton.

Woe worth thee Tarlton,
That euer thou wast borne:
Thy wife hath made thee Cuckold,
And thou must weare the horne.


Tarlton presently answered him in Extemporie.

What and if I be (Boy)
I am nere the worse:
Shee keepes me like a Gentleman,
With money in my purse.



How Tarlton bid himselfe to dinner to my Lord Mayors. A Iest came in Tarltons head where to dine, and thought he, in all that a man does, let him ayme at the fairest,
Unnumbered page

for sure if. I bid my selfe any where this day, it shall be to my Lord Maiors: and vpon this, goes to the Counter and entred his action against my Lord Maior, who was presently told of it, and sends for him. Tarlton waits dinner time, and then comes, who was admitted presently. Master Tarlton, sayes my Lord Maior, haue you entred an action against me in the Poultry Counter? My Lord, sayes Tarlton, haue you entred an action against me in Woodstréet Counter? Not I in troth, saies my Lord. No saies Tarlton, he was a villaine that told me so then: but if it be not so, forgiue me this fault my Lord, and I will neuer offend in the next: but in the end he begins to sweare, how he will bee reuenged on him that mockt him, and flings out in a rage, But my Lord sayd, stay M. Tarlton, dine with me, and no doubt but after dinner you will be better minded. I will try that my Lord, saies Tarlton, and if it alter mine anger, both mine enemie & I will thanke you together for this curtesie.


Tarltons Iest of a box on the eare. ONe that fell out with his friend, méets him in the stréet, and calling him into a corner, gaue him a boxe on the eare, and feld him, getting him gone, and neuer told wherefore he did so: which Tarlton beholding, raised vp the fellow, and askt him the reason of their suddaine falling out? can you tell Sir said the fellow, for by my troth as yet I cannot? Well said Tarlton, the more foole you, for had I such féeling of the cause, my wit would remember the iniurie, but many men are goslings, the more they féele the lesse they conceiue.


Tarltons Iest to two Taylors. TArlton méeting two Tailors (friends of his) in the euening, in mirth cryes, who goes there? A man answered a Taylor: How many is there? one: Yea said Tarlton, two said the other Taylor: then you say true, said Tarlton: for two Taylors goes to a man. But before they parted, they foxt Tarlton, at the Castle in Paternoster Row, that Tarlton confest them two Taylors to be honest men: so what they spent in the purse they got in the person: comming but one by Tarltons account, they returned two: but Tarlton comming one, returned lesse by his wit, for that was shrunk in the whetting.


How Tarlton iested at his wife. TArlton and his wife keeping an Ordinarie in Paternoster Row, was bidden out to Supper, and because he was a man noted, she would not goe with him in the street, but intreats him to kéepe one side and she another, which he consented to: but as he went he would cry out to her and say, Turne that way wife, and anon on this side wife: so the people flockt the more to laugh at them, but his wife more then mad angry, goes backe againe, and almost forswore his company.


How Tarlton committed a Rakers horse to Ward. VVHen Tarlton dwelt in Gracious stréet, at a Tauerne at the signe of the Saba, he was chosen Scauenger: and often the Ward complained of his slacknes in kéeping the stréets cleane: so on a time when the Cart came, he asked the Raker, why he did his businesse so slackly. Sir said he, my fore-horse was in the fault, who being let blood and drencht yesterday, I durst not labour him: sir said Tarlton, your horse shall smart for it, and so leads him to the Counter, which the Raker laught at, and without his horse did his worke with the rest, thinking Tarltons homor was to iest, and would returne him his horse againe anon: but when that anon came, he was faine to pay all his fées of the prison, as directly as if he himselfe had béene there: for if Tarlton had committed the master, the busines had not gone forward, therefore the horse was in prison for the Master.


Unnumbered page


How Tarlton made Armin his adopted sonne to succeed him. TArlton kéeping a Tauerne in Gracious stréet, hee let it to another, who was indebted to Armins Master, a Gold smith in Lumbard stréet: yet he himselfe had a Chamber in the same house. And this Armin being then a wag came often thither to demaund his Masters money, which hee sometimes had, and sometimes had not: in the end the man growing poore, told the boy he had no money for his Master, and he must beare with him. The mans name being Charles, Armin made this verse, writing it with chalke on a waine-scot:

O world how wilt thou lie, is this Charles the great? that I denie:
Indeed Charles the great before,
But now Charles the lesse, being poore.


Tarlton comming into the roome reading it, and partly acquainted with the boyes humor, comming often thither for his M. money, tooke a piece of chalke, & writ this rime by it.

A wag thou art, none can preuent thee,
And thy desert shall content thee:
Let me diuine, as I am, so in time thou'lt be the same.
My adopted sonne therefore be,
To enioy my Clownes suite after me.


And sée how it fell out: the Boy reading this, so loued Tarlton after, that regarding him with more respect, vsed to his playes, and fell in a league with his humour, and priuate practise brought him to present playing, and at this houre performes the same, where at the Globe on the Bancke-side men may sée him.


Tarltons greeting with Bankes his horse. THere was one Bankes (in the time of Tarlton ) who serued the Earle of Essex, & had a horse of strange qualities: and being at the Crosse-keyes in Gracious stréete, getting money with him (as he was mightily resorted to:) Tarlton then (with his fellowes) playing at the Bell by, came into the Crosse-keyes amongst many people) to sée fashions: which Bankes perceiuing (to make the people laugh) sayes Signior (to his Horse) goe fetch mee the veriest foole in the company, the Iade comes immediatly, and with his mouth drawes Tarlton forth: Tarlton with merry words said nothing, but God a mercy Horse: in the end, Tarlton séeing the people laugh so, was angry inwardly, and said, Sir, had I power of your horse, as you haue, I would doe more then that. Where ere it be said Bankes (to please him) I will charge him to do it: then saies Tarlton, charge him to bring me the veriest whore-master in this company. He shall saies Bankes: Signior saies he, bring M. Tarlton heere the veriest Whoremaster in the company: the Horse leades his master to him: then God a mercy Horse indéed, sayes Tarlton: the people had much adoe to kéepe peace, but Bancks & Tarlton had like to squarde, and the horse by to giue ayme: but euer after it was a by-word through London, God a mercy horse, and is to this day.


An excellent Iest of Tarlton suddenly spoken. AT the Bull at Bishops-gate was a play of Henry the fift, wherein the Iudge was to take a boxe on the eare, and because he was absent that should take the blow: Tarlton himselfe (euer forward to please) tooke upon him to play the same Iudge, besides his owne part of the Clowne: and Knell then playing Henry the fift, hit Tarlton a sound boxe indéed, which made the people laugh the more, because it was he: but anone the Iudge goes in, & immediatly Tarlton (in his Clownes clothes) comes out, and askes the Actors what newes? O saith one, hadst thou béene here, thou shouldst haue séene Prince Henry hit the Iudge a terribly▪ boxe on the eare: What man, said Tarlton, strike a Iudge?
Unnumbered page

It is true y faith, said the other: no other like, said Tarlton, and it could not be but terrible to the Iudge, when the report so terrifies me, that me thinkes the blow remaines still on my chéeke, that it burnes againe. The people laught at this mightily, and to this day I haue heard it commended for rare: but no maruaile, for he had many of these. But I would sée our Clownes in these dayes doe the like, no I warrant ye, and yet they thinke well of themselues too.


Tarltons Iest with a Boy in the street. A Wag-halter Boy met Tarlton in the stréet, and said: Master Tarlton who liues longest? Marry Boy, sayes Tarlton, he that dies latest: and why die men so fast, said the Boy? because they want breath, said Tarlton: no rather said the Boy, because their time is come: then thy time is come, said Tarlton, sée who comes yonder: Who? said the Boy: Marry said Tarlton, Bull the hangman: or one that would willingly be thy hangman: Nay, hang me then, if I employ him at this time, said the Boy. Well said Tarlton, then thou wilt be hanged by thy owne confession, and so they parted.


A Iest of Tarlton, prouing Mustard to haue wit. TArlton kéeping an Ordinarie in Pater-noster row, and sitting with Gentlemen to make them merry, would approue Mustard, (standing before them) to haue wit: how so sayes one? It is like a witty skold, méeting another skold, knowing that skold will skold, begins to skold first, so saies he, the Mustard being lickt vp, and knowing that you will bite it, begins to bite you first: Ile trie that saies a Gull by, and the Mustard so tickled him, that his eyes watered: how now sayes Tarlton, does my Iest sauour? I, saies the Gull, and bite too: if you had had better wit, sayes Tarlton, you would haue bit first: so then conclude with me, that dumbe vnféeling Mustard, hath more wit then a talking vnféeling foole as you are. Some were pleased and some were not, but all Tarltons care was taken (for his resolution was such euer) before he talkt any Iest.


How Tarlton tooke Tobacco at the first comming vp of it. TArlton (as other Gentlemen vsed) at the first comming vp of Tobacco, did take it more for fashions sake then otherwise, and being in a roome, set betwéene two men ouercome with wine, and they neuer séeing the like, wondred at it, and séeing the vapour come out of Tarltons nose, cried out, fire, fire, and threw a cup of wine in Tarltons face: Make no more stirre quoth Tarlton, the fire is quenched, if the Sheriffes come it will turne to a fine, as the custome is. And drinking that againe, fie sayes the other, what a stincke it makes, I am almost poisoned: If it offend, sayes Tarlton, lets euery one take a little of the smell, and so the sauour will quickly goe: but Tobacco whiffes made them leaue him to pay all.


Unnumbered page


Tarltons prettie Countrie Iests.
Tarltons wit betweene a Bird and a Woodcocke. I N the Citie of Glocester, Master Bird of the Chappell met with Tarlton, who ioyfull to regréet other, went to visit his friends: amongst the rest, M. Bird of the Quéens Chappell visited Master Woodcock of the Colledge, where méeting, many frindly spéeches past, amongst which, M. Woodcocke challenged M. Bird of kin: who mused that he was of his affinitie and hee neuer knew it: yes sayes M. Woodcocke, euery Woodcocke is a Bird, therefore it must néeds be so. Lord, Sir, sayes Tarlton, you are wide, for though euery Woodcocke be a Bird, yet euery Bird is not a Woodcocke. So M. Woodcocke like a Woodcocke bit his lip, and mum budged was silent.


Tarltons Iest of a Gridiron. VVHile the Quéens Plaiers lay in Worcester Citie to get money, it was his custome oft to sing extempory of Theams giuen him: amongst which they were appoynted to play the next day: now one fellow of the City amongst the rest, that séemed quaint of conceit, to lead other youths with his fine wit, gaue out that the next day hee would giue him a Theam, to put him to a non plus: diuers of his friends acquainted with the same, expected some rare conceit: Well, the next day came, and my gallant gaue him his inuention in two lines, which was this this:

Me thinkes it is a thing vnfit.
To see a Gridiron turne the spit.


The people laughed at this, thinking his wit knew no answere thereunto, which angered Tarlton excéedingly, and presently with a smile looking about, when they expected wonders, he put it off thus:

Me thinkes it is a thing vnfit,
To see an Asse haue any wit.


The people hooted for ioy, to sée the Theame-giuer dasht, who like a dog with his taile betwéene his legs, left the place: But such commendations Tarlton got, that hee supt with the Bailiffe that night, where my Theamer durst not come, although he were sent for, so much he vexed at that vnlookt▪ for answere.


Tarltons answere in defence of his flat nose. I Remember I was once at a Play▪ in the Country, where as Tarltons vse was, the Play being done, euery one so pleased to throwe vp his Theame: amongst all the rest, one was read to this same effect, word by word.

Tarlton, I am one of thy friends, and none of thy foes,
Then I prethee tell how thou cam'st by thy flat nose:
Had I beene present at that time on those bankes,
I would haue layd my short sword ouer his long shankes.


Tarlton mad at this question, as it was his propertie sooner to take such a matter ill then well, very suddenly returned him this answere:

Friend or foe, if thou wilt needs know, marke me well,
With parting dogs & beares, then by the ears, this chance fel:
But what of that? though my nose be flat, my credit to saue,
Yet very well, I can by the smell, scent an honest man from a knaue.



Unnumbered page


Tarltons Iest of a Bristowman. VVHen the Quéenes Players were restrained in Summer, they trauailed downe to S. Iames his Faire, at Bristowe, where they were worthily entertained both of Londoners, and those Citizens: it happened that a wealthy Citizen, called M. Sunbanke, one morning secretly married his Maid; but not so secret, but it was blowne abroad: that morning, Tarlton and others, walking in the Faire to visit his familiar friends of London, and being in company of Bristow men, they did sée M. Sunbancke comming, who had this propertie with his necke, not to stirre it any way, but to turne body & all: it chanced at the Faire end, he stood to pisse against a wall: to whom Tarlton came, and clapping him on the shoulder, God giue you ioy of your marriage, saies he: M. Sunbanke being taken pissing against the wall, would haue lookt backe to thanke him, and suddainly turnes about body and all, in the view of many, and shewed all: which so abasht him, that ashamed he tooke into a Tauerne, protesting that he had rather haue spent ten pound: sure sayd the Vintner, the fault is in your necke, who will not turne without the bodies assistance, and not in M. Tarlton: Call you him M. Tarlton, saies M. Sunbancke? I Sir, saies the Vintner, he is the Quéens Iester: he may be whose Iester he will be, but this Iest agrées not with me at this time.


A Iest broken of Tarlton by a Country Gentleman. IN the Country where the Quéens Players were accepted into a Gentlemans house: the Waggon vnloading of the apparell, the Waggoner comes to Tarlton, & doth desire him to speake to the Steward for his horses: I will sayes he, and comming to the Steward, Sir, saies Tarlton, where shall our Horses spend the time? The Gentleman looking at Tarlton at that question, suddenly answered, if it please you, or them, let them walke a turne or two: or there is a faire Garden, let them play a game or two at bowles in the Alley, and departs thence about his other businesse. Tarlton commending the suddaine wit of the steward, said little: but my Steward not quiet, tels to the Gentlewomen aboue, how he had driuen Tarlton to a nonplus with a iest: whereat they all did laugh heartily: which a Seruingman louing Tarlton well, came and told him as much. Tarlton to adde fuell to the fire, and loath to rest thus put off with a iest, goes and gets two of the horses into the Garden, and turns them into the Bowling Alley, who with their héeles made hauocke, being the Gentlemans only pastime: The Ladies aboue from a window, séeing horses in the Garden Alley, call the Knight, who cries out to Tarlton, Fellow, what meanest thou? nothing Sir, saies he, but two of my horses are at seuen vp, for a pecke of Prouender, a foolish match that I made: now they being in play at bowles, run, run: your steward may come after and crie rub, rub: at which, though they smiled, yet the steward had no thankes for his labour, to set the horses to such an exercise: and they could not blame Tarlton, who did but as he was bidden: but by this Iest Oats and Hay, stable-roome, and all, was plenty.


How Tarlton made one of his company vtterly forsweare drunkennesse. AT Salisbury Tarlton & his fellowes were to play before the Maior & his brethren: but one of his company, a yong man was so drunke that he could not: whereat Tarlton as mad angry, as he was mad drunke, claps me on his legs a huge payre of boults: the fellow dead asléep felt nothing: when all was done, they conuaied him to the Iayle on a mans backe, and intreated the Iayler to doe God good seruice, and let him lie there till he waked. While they were about their sport the fellow waked, and finding himselfe in durance, and the Iayle hung round with bolts and shakels,
Unnumbered page

he began to blesse himselfe, and thought sure in his drunkennes he had done some mischiefe: with that he called to know, but none came to him, then he thought verely his fault was capitall, and that hee was close prisoner: by and by comes the Kéeper, and moaned him, that one so yong should come to so shamefull a death as hanging: anone, another comes, and another with the like, which further put him in a puzzle: but at last comes Tarlton and others, intreating the Kéeper, yet if it might be, that they might sée their fellow ere they went, but hee very hardly was intreated, but at length the poore drunken Signior cal'd out for them: in they come. Oh Tom, sayes Tarlton, hard was thy hap in drunkennesse to murder this honest man, and our hard hap too, to haue it reported any of our company is hangd for it. O God, O God saies the fellow, is my fault so great? then commend me to all my friends. Well, short tale to make, the fellow forswore drunkennesse if he could escape, and by as cunning a wile to his thinking, they got him out of prison by an escape, and sent him to London before, who was not a litle glad he was gone: but sée how this Iest wrought, by little and little the fellow left his excessiue drinking, and in timealtered his desire of drunkennesse.


How Tarlton saued his head from cutting off. TArlton vpon a time being in the Countrie, & lodging in an homely Inne, during which time there was a gentleman dwelling in the same towne, somewhat frantick and distraught of his wits: which mad man on a suddaine rusht into Tarltons bed-chamber with his sword drawne, and finding him there in bed, would haue slain him: saying, villain, were it not valiantly done to strike off thy knaues head at one blowe? Tarlton answered, tut sir, thats nothing with your worship to do, you can as easily strike off two heads at one blow as one: wherefore, if you please▪ Ile go downe and call vp another, and so you may strike off both our heads at once: the mad-man beleeued him, and so let him slip away.


How Tarlton escaped imprisonment. TArlton hauing béene dominéering very late one Night, with two of his friends, and comming homewards along Cheapside, the watch being then set: Master Constable asked, who goes there? thrée merry men, quoth Tarlton: that is not sufficient, what are you, quoth M. Constable? why saies Tarlton, one of vs is an eye-maker, and the other a light maker: what sayst thou knaue, doest mocke me? the one is an eye-maker, the other a light maker, which two properties belong vnto God onely: commit these blasphemers quoth the Constable: Nay, I pray you good M. Constable be good in your Office, I will approue what I haue sayd to be true. If thou canst, sayes the Constable, you shall passe, otherwise you shall be all thrée punished. Why quoth Tarlton, this fellow is an eye-maker, because a Spectacle maker, and this other a maker of light, because a Chandler, that makes your darkest night as light as your Lanthorne. The Constable séeing them so pleasant, was we'l contented, the rest of the Watchmen laughed, and Tarlton with his two companions went home quietly.


How Tarlton deceiued a Countrey wench. THe Quéenes Plaiers trauelling into the West country to play, and lodging in a little village, some ten miles from Bristow, in which village dwelt a pretty nut-browne Lasse▪ to whom Tarlton made proffer of marriage, protesting that he came from London, purposely to marry her: the simple Maide being proud, to be beloued by such a one, whom she knew to be the Quéenes man, without more intreaty yéelded, & being both at the Church together, and M. Parson ready to performe his dutie, and comming to the words of I Richard take thée Ioane: nay, stay good Master Parson, I will goe and call my fellowes, and come to you
Unnumbered page

againe: so going out of the Church in haste, returned at leisure; for hauing his horse ready sadled, hee rode toward Bristow, and by the way told his fellowes▪ of his successe with his wench.


How Tarlton went to kill Crowes. IT chanced vpon a time, as Tarlton went foorth with a birding péece into the fields to kill Crowes, hée espied a Daw sitting in a Trée, at which he meant to shoot; but at the same instant, there came one by, to whom he spake in this manner: Sir, quoth he, yonder I sée a Daw, which I will shoot at if shée sit: if shée sit, said the other, then she is a Daw indéed: but quoth Tarlton, if she sit not, what is she then? Marry quoth the other, a Daw also: at which words shée immediatly flew away: whereupon Tarlton spake merrily in a Rime, as followeth:

Whether a Daw sit, or whether a Daw flie,
Whether a Daw stand, or whether a Daw lie,
Whether a daw creeke, or whether a Daw crie,
In what case soeuer a Daw perseuer.
A Daw is a Daw, and a Daw shall be euer.



How a poore Beggerman ouer-reached Tarlton by his wit. AS Tarlton vpon a day sate at his owne doore, to whom came a poore old man, & begged a penny for the Lords sake, wherupon Tarlton hauing no single money about him, askt the begger what money he had, no more money master but one single penny. Tarlton being merrily disposed, called for this penny, and hauing receiued it, gaue it to his boy to fetch a pot of Ale, whereat▪ the Begger grew blancke, and began to gather vp his wits how to get it againe: the pot of Ale for the Beggers penny being brought, he proferred to drinke to the begger: nay stay awhile Master, quoth the begger, the vse is where I was borne, that he that paies for the drinke, must drinke first: thou saist well quoth Tarlton, goe to, Drinke to me then: Whereupon the Begger tooke the Pot, saying, here Master I drinke to you, (and therewithall dranke off euery droppe) now Maister, if you will pledge me, send for it as I haue done: Tarlton séeing himselfe so ouer-reacht, greatly commended the Beggers wit, and withall in recompence thereof, gaue him a Teastor: with that the Begger said, that he would most truely pray to God for him: no answered Tarlton, I pray thée pray for thy selfe, for I take no vsury for Almes▪ déeds.


Of Tarltons pleasant answere to a Gallant, by the high-way side. IT was Tarltons occasion another time to ride into Suffolke, being furnished with a very leane large horse: and by the way a lustie gallant met him, and in mockage, asked him, what a yard of his horse was worth? marry sit, quoth Tarlton, I pray you alight and lift vp my horses taile, and they in that shop will tell you the price of a yard.


How Tarlton would haue drowned his wife. VPon a time, Tarlton and his wife (as passengers) came sailing from Southampton towards London, a mightie storme arose, and endangered the Ship, whereupon the Captaine thereof, charged euery man to throw into the sea the heauiest thing he could best spare, to the end to lighten somewhat the Ship: Tarlton, that had his wife there, offered to throw her ouer-board, but the company rescued her, and being asked wherefore he meant so to do? he answered shée was the heauiest thing I haue, and I can best spare her.


Unnumbered page


How Tarlton made his Will and Testament. OF late there was a Gentleman liuing in England, that wheresoeuer he dined, would of euery dish conuey a modicum thereof into his Gownesléeue: which Gentleman being vpon a time at dinner at a Gentlemans house in the Country, there he vsed his aforesaid quality, in the cōpany of M. Tarlton, who perceiuing it, said thus vnto the company: My masters, I am now determined before you all, to make my last Will and Testament: and first, I bequeath my soule to God my creator, and my body to be buried in the sléeue of yonder Gentlemans Gowne: and with that stepping to him, he turned vp the Gowne sléeue, whereout here dropt a bird, and there a bird, with choise of much other good chéere, hée still shaking it, saying, I meant this sléeue Gentleman, this sléeue I meant.


How Tarlton called a Gentleman Knaue by craft. VVIthin a while after, as the same Gentleman and Tarlton passed through a fielde together, a Crow in a Trée cryed, kaw, kaw: sée yonder Tarlton, quoth the Gentleman, yonder Crow calleth thée knaue: no sir (he answered) he beckens to your worship as the better man.


Tarltons Iest of a Country▪ wench. TArlton going towards Hogsdon, met a Country maid comming to market, her Mare stumbling down she fell ouer and ouer, shewing all that euer God sent her, and then rising vp againe, she turned her round about vnto Master Tarlton, and said, Gods body sir, did you euer sée the like before? No in good sooth, quoth Tarlton, neuer but once in London.


How Tarlton deceiued an Inne-holder at Sandwich. VPon a time when the Plaiers were put to silence, Tarlton and his boy frolickt so long in the Country, that all their money was gone, and being a great way from London, they knew not what to doe; but as want is the whetstone of wit, Tarlton gathereth his conceit together, and practised a tricke to beare him vp to London without money, & thus it was: Vnto an Inne in Sandwich they went, and there lay for two daies at great charge, although he had no money to pay for the same: the third morning he bad his man go downe and male-content himselfe before his Hoast and his Hoastesse, & mumbling say to himselfe, Lord▪ Lord, what a scalde master doe I serue, this it is to serue such Seminary Priests and Iesuits, now euen as I am an honest boy, Ile leaue him in the lurch, and shift for my selfe: here's a doe about penance and mortification, as though (forsooth) Christ hath not died enough for all: The boy mumbled out these his instructions so dissembling, that it strooke a iealousie in the Inne-holders heart, that out of doubt his master was a Seminary Priest; whereupon he presently sent for the Constable, and told him all the foresaid matter, and so went vp both together to attach Tarlton in his chamber, who purposely had shut himselfe close in, and betaken him to his knées, and to his crosses, to make the matter séeme more suspitious, which they espying through the Key-hole, made no more adoe, but in they rushed, and arrested him for a Seminary Priest, discharged his score, bore his, and his boyes charges vp to London, and there in hope to haue rich rewards, presented him to M. Fleetwood, the old Recorder of London: but now marke the Iest; when the Recorder saw Tarlton, and knew him passing well, entertained him very courteously, and all to be foold the Inne-holder and his mate, and sent them away with fleas in their eares: but when Tarlton saw himselfe discharged out of their hands, 〈1 page missing〉

Subject: English wit and humor - Early works to 1800.

USTC subject classification: Literature; Adages, aphorisms, emblem books, jests, proverbs

Title: Tarltons iests Drawne into these three parts. 1 His court-wittie iests 2 His sound cittie iests. 3 His country prettie iests. Full of delight, wit, and honest myrth.

Other authors: Tarlton, Richard, d. 1588  ; (attributed name.)

Pages: [32+ ] leaves

Publication date: 1613

Imprint: London : Printed [by Thomas Snodham ] for Iohn Budge, and are to be sold at his shop, at the great South doore of Paules, 1613.

Printer/Publisher: Printed [by Thomas Snodham ] for Iohn Budge, and are to be sold at his shop, at the great South doore of Paules

Place of publication: London

Country of publication: England

Source type: Book

Language of publication: English

Document type: Book

Document feature: Illustration

Document note: Printer's name from STC. With woodcut title vignette. "More or less fictitious anecdotes, many of them far older than Tarlton, who probably was in no way responsible for the work"--Folger Shakespeare Library catalogue. In this edition, C2r line 5 from bottom has: Globe on the Bancke side. Identified as STC 23684b on UMI microfilm reel 671.. Signatures: A-D⁴+. Imperfect; all after D4 lacking; title page torn; some print show-through. Reproduction of the original in the Folger Shakespeare Library. Other Contributors: Tarlton, Richard, d. 1588

Source library: Folger Shakespeare Library

Collection: Early English Books, 1475-1640 (STC)

Reel position: 671:08

Bibliographic name/numberAbbreviation reference for Bibliographic number: STC (2nd ed.) / 23683.3

ProQuest document ID: 2248567929

Document URL: https://www.proquest.com/books/tarltons-iests-drawne-into-these-three-parts-1/docview/2248567929/se-2?accountid=9784

Copyright: Keyboarded and encoded full text © 2003-2004 Early English Books Online Text Creation Partnership. All Rights Reserved.

Last updated: 2020-11-11

Database: Early Modern Books

____________________________________________________________

Bibliography

Citation style: Chicago 15th Edition (Author-Date System)

Tarltons iests drawne into these three parts. 1 his court-wittie iests 2 his sound cittie iests. 3 his country prettie iests. full of delight, wit, and honest myrth1613. . London: , https://www.proquest.com/books/tarltons-iests-drawne-into-these-three-parts-1/docview/2248567929/se-2?accountid=9784 (accessed August 11, 2022).

____________________________________________________________

Contact us at: http://about.proquest.com/go/pqissupportcontact
Database copyright © 2022 ProQuest LLC. All rights reserved.
Terms and Conditions: https://www.proquest.com/info/termsAndConditions